---
layout: post
title: "the web is really two things"
blurb: ""
author: "sean"
---

moving on

Howdy! :-)

Clueless managers., Unrealistic deadlines. Overlong standup meetings. Meetings. Piles and piles of deadly, ancient code written with apparent hostility. Intermittent bugs that send you to the edge of insanity and back.

Nothing sucks the joy out of programming like a job.

What you need is a ticket to Code Disneyland, a magical wonderland filled with Shiny New Things, blank text editors, empty git repos and clean slates.

You need a side project.

In a week or so I'll be officially announcing my next project, the Escape Plan: side projects for busy devs. If your job is threatening to ruin your love of programming, this will be for you.

But let's talk about side projects for a minute and why most of them end up as Github ghost towns.

Years ago I ran a small Meetup group called "Devs with side projects". I had a side project I was working on, as did most of my friends, but none of us were really making progress. My theory was we just needed to block off some time and dedicate it to our projects each week. And so Devs with Side Projects was born and we met every Sunday for four, uninterrupted hours of side project bliss.

It didn't work. The vast majority of folks didn't finish a single project. Why did some projects ship and others flounder?

You may think it has to do with discipline and working hard and being committed. You may feel like your own projects haven't shipped because of some personal failing or maybe you didn't have time because of work, family, life etc. But it has nothing to do with you and everything to do with the scope of your project. That's all there is to it.

Take for example two of my own projects, Big Brother (https://github.com/sfioritto/bigbrother) and Monocles (https://github.com/sfioritto/monocles). Big Brother is in side project purgatory and Monocles is finished, (but not hosted anywhere anymore, if you were thinking of trying it out).

Monocles was designed from the ground up for me to learn the fundamentals of Twisted, a pretty sweet Python library. A proxy server is the Hello World of Twisted and Monocles is a proxy server. This is a great example of a simple, small project with a very tightly defined goal: learn Twisted by writing a proxy. 

Big Brother is supposed to be a browser fingerprinting game, if I'd actually finished it. (If you're unfamiliar with the concept of a browser fingerprint, checkout https://panopticlick.eff.org/). Ultimately Big Brother was a marketing app for an EVEN BIGGER project I was working on for online identity.

Big Brother, as a side project, was doomed. Technically the project was much bigger than Monocles, but even worse the goal I was trying to achieve with the project was far too big: create a game based on browser fingerprinting to generate leads for my pet browser identity project. With such a big goal driving the project there's no way I could settle for a smaller project. There's no way I'd ever cut back a feature just to ship.

A big goal creates insurmountable project scope inertia.

The trick to picking side projects you will finish is to pick small, tiny goals. Tiny goals lead to reasonable and adjustable technical scope. You can dial the difficulty up or down without worrying about "killing your darlings" which means you'll actually ship. There's nothing wrong with having a really big goal, but big goals and side projects are not compatible. 

I hope that helps you finish your next side project. Stay tuned for the Escape Plan announcement next week. Have a great week! :-)

- Sean
